In this video we're looking at naming things in ggplot charts.

We're going to start by thinking about naming things in our code. So our code uses a lot of functions so this basic syntax for a function is you have a function name you then have a bracket or parenthesis and then you have a list of parameters separated by commas and then a closing parenthesis. So functions can take a bunch of parameters and those parameters are matched by name if you name them. If you don't name them they're matched by position. So this matching by position means you can be a bit lazy and not name things if you don't want to.

For example our plots that we've looked at contained three functions. It contained ggplot which we had the parameter data equals penguins, it contained an aes() function with parameters x and y, and it contained a geom_point() function, and in each case we've named the parameters because this is good practice so I try and remember to do it and encourage you to do so also. It helps make the code self-explanatory. Nonetheless you can simplify things if you want so, for example this line of code down the bottom here does exactly the same thing as the code with everything named because the first parameter to ggplot is the data parameter and the first two parameters to aes() are x and y. Now, I have no idea what the third parameter to aes() is, and I don't really know what the second parameter to ggplot() is either.

If you rely on order then it means whoever reads the code also needs to know the order so it pays to always name parameters as it's easier for everyone.

Charts should also have good names as well. That doesn't mean that you necessarily need a title on the chart but sometimes they're important. The idea is that charts should be self-contained if possible. They they should tell the story that you're trying to get across to the viewer or reader without the viewer or reader having to figure out too much about what each bit of the plot is doing.

As a result you should have concise but accurate axis labels that include units so that the reader automatically knows what the numbers on the plot represent. Similarly we should have good guide names and ensure that the labels in the guide don't abbreviate things unnecessarily.

A title and possibly a subtitle can be useful if it helps tell the story and it's possible that additional captioning might help for example you might want to write down who generated the chart or provide a link to the code that generates the chart or a link to the data source that was used for example. The idea being that that final image may end up going around the world. You might do a chart and you post it on social media and someone finds it interesting and reposts it and away it goes and so any context that was with that chart might be stripped away. Therefore you want to have as much information as you can within the chart itself so that at least that context stays with it.

So how do we do that? We use the labs() command in for pretty much everything. The labs command takes a list of parameters which correspond to aesthetics, so labs(x = ) will replace the x axis label, y equals will replace the y axis label, color will replace the label used for the color guide and so on.

The labels that you want should be in quotes because it's not some pre-defined object that R knows about.

So here's an example we take our previous chart and we use labs to tidy up the x axis and the y-axis labels. Notice I haven't changed the colour, perhaps I'd want to change that so that the S was capital for example. So by default it's just using the name of the column there.

What about titles and captions? Well again we can change them using labs(). You've got title, subtitle and caption parameters. The subtitle is a line underneath the title that's in a slightly smaller font and the caption is usually in the bottom right and reasonably small and that's useful for identifying the data source or the author or some other piece of information.

Now titles can be useful to help tell the story and this is particularly important in the case where you want to share something with others because it helps you direct the reader to the key feature that you want to point out: it helps tell the story.

To make the most of the title you sometimes need to editorialize a bit: you can choose to pick out the feature that you want to show without stripping too much context away from the chart. It's kind of like writing a headline for a news article. You know the headline can be hugely useful at attracting people to the story and telling them what the key point in the story is but it can also be used for clickbait, to intentionally provoke in the hope of getting clicks, so you should be a little bit careful but you can take advantage of that power.

So we're going to show a quick example here, something that I see students do quite often is they might do a title something like this where they've said the title is the distribution of penguin flipper lengths. That of course is 100% correct right: this is a chart that shows the distribution of penguin flipper lengths. It's a density plot so it's telling you how the flipper lengths vary, so the title is completely correct. But it's also useless in that the only piece of information it's giving us is that it's about penguins: we can see it's distributions because we've got some distributions sitting there, and we know it's flipper length as we can see it on the axis label. Even the penguins bit might not be so useful as we have species which many folk will recognise as being penguins anyway.

Here's a better one: "Penguin flipper length differs by species". So this is a much better title and I think an acceptable one because you're now highlighting that the key thing you want want folk to look at is the fact that the red the green and the blue density curves are in different spots: the red and the green are perhaps about the same the blue is definitely bigger, so this is helping to tell the story.

This next one is even better I think: "Gentoo penguins have longer flippers". The idea is that you're pointing out that the main thing to notice in this plot is that the blue is clearly different to the red and the green: with the red and the green maybe there's some difference but there's a lot of overlap as well, but the blue's definitely different right so you're helping direct the reader to the right place n the chart, and I think that's what a a good title or perhaps title and subtitle combined can do.

So when you're doing a chart and writing a title have a think about you know. Ask yourself what the headline is. That's what you can use.

So here's one that that that I've done so this was way back in the start of COVID-19 pandemic when we were all at home with the border closed, and there was a bunch of debate about the number of cases that there were at the border. So people that were coming into the country had to go into isolation for a couple of weeks in a hotel for managed isolation and there was a period where there were basically no cases appearing at the border. So this is a chart that I did that looked to try and see what might be going on. So the red bars represent the proportion of COVID-19 cases at the border out of those arriving so it started off and there was hardly any as there were a bunch of people coming in but most people weren't positive, and then there were a bunch more positives as things took off around the world and the number of flights decreased so there were a fewer people coming. But then there was this whole period where basically there was there were no positives coming in through the border which was a bit questionable, and then they ticked up again. So this was highlighting that maybe there was some something odd going on in the month of May. Perhaps they weren't testing properly or weren't reporting the results properly.

So the key idea is that taking the time to name things is important, both for your code so that it's readable, but also for your charts. Future-you will thank you for taking the time to document your code (through naming parameters) as you'll be able to figure out what is going on quicker.

And the same applies to your charts. Consider good axis labels making sure they're clear and that you add units if needed and that your grouping variables are well named. And add a title or a subtitle or a caption and use that as the headline to help tell the story.
